[ES|QL][DOCS] Add docs for date_period and time_duration (#116368)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/esql/time-spans.asciidoc

[[esql-time-spans]]
=== {esql} time spans

++++
<titleabbrev>Time spans</titleabbrev>
++++

> Time spans provide a way of describing a specific period of time that separates two datetime values. There are currently two supported types of time spans, `DATE_PERIOD` specifies intervals in years, quarters, months, weeks and days, and `TIME_DURATION` specifies intervals in hours, minutes, seconds and milliseconds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Time spans provide a way of describing a specific period of time that separates two datetime values. There are currently two supported types of time spans: `DATE_PERIOD`, specifying intervals in years, quarters, months, weeks and days, and `TIME_DURATION`, specifying intervals in hours, minutes, seconds and milliseconds.
```

> Time spans provide a way of describing a specific period of time that separates two datetime values. There are currently two supported types of time spans, `DATE_PERIOD` specifying intervals in years, quarters, months, weeks and days, and `TIME_DURATION` specifying intervals in hours, minutes, seconds and milliseconds.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Time spans represent intervals between two datetime values. There are currently two supported types of time spans:
* `DATE_PERIOD` specifies intervals in years, quarters, months, weeks and days
* `TIME_DURATION` specifies intervals in hours, minutes, seconds and milliseconds
```

> The time span contains two elements, an integer value and a temporal unit, both are required when specifying a time span.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A time span requires two elements: an integer value and a temporal unit.
```

> The time span contains two elements, an integer value and a temporal unit, both of them are required when specifying a time span.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The time span contains two elements, an integer value and a temporal unit, both required when specifying a time span.
```

> Time spans are often used in datetime related grouping functions like <<esql-bucket, BUCKET>>, scalar functions like <<esql-date_trunc, DATE_TRUNC>> and arithmetic operators like `+` and `-`. There are conversions functions that can convert string literals to time spans, <<esql-to_dateperiod, TO_DATEPERIOD>>, <<esql-to_timeduration, TO_TIMEDURATION>> and their corresponding cast operators `::DATE_PERIOD` and `::TIME_DURATION`.

Reviewer: For `+` and `-` we could also link to the [operators page](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/master/esql-functions-operators.html), since these list the time span types as supported, though I don't know how to add the slug (`#_add`) -- maybe @leemthompo knows?

Reviewer: `cast operators` could also be [linked](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/master/esql-functions-operators.html#esql-cast-operator).

Author: > For `+` and `-` we could also link to the [operators page](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/master/esql-functions-operators.html), since these list the time span types as supported, though I don't know how to add the slug (`#_add`) -- maybe @leemthompo knows?

I figured out a way to link them!

> Time spans are often used in datetime related grouping functions like <<esql-bucket, BUCKET>>, scalar functions like <<esql-date_trunc, DATE_TRUNC>> and arithmetic operators like <<esql-add, `+`>> and <<esql-subtract, `-`>>. There are conversions functions that can convert string literals to time spans, <<esql-to_dateperiod, TO_DATEPERIOD>>, <<esql-to_timeduration, TO_TIMEDURATION>> and their corresponding <<esql-cast-operator, cast operators>> `::DATE_PERIOD` and `::TIME_DURATION`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Time spans work with grouping functions such as <<esql-bucket,BUCKET>>, scalar functions such as
<<esql-date_trunc,DATE_TRUNC>>, and arithmetic operators such as <<esql-add,`+`>> and
<<esql-subtract,`-`>>. Convert strings to time spans using <<esql-to_dateperiod,TO_DATEPERIOD>>,
<<esql-to_timeduration,TO_TIMEDURATION>>, or the cast operators `::DATE_PERIOD`, `::TIME_DURATION`.
```

==== Examples of using time spans in {esql}

> With `BUCKET`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With `BUCKET`:
```

> ==== Examples of using time spans in {esql}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[discrete]
[[esql-time-spans]]
==== Examples of using time spans in {esql}
```

Author: Do you mean `[[esql-time-spans-examples]]` here? `[[esql-time-spans]]` has already been used at the beginning of this file.

Reviewer 2: certainly did! fixed :)

[source.merge.styled,esql]
----
include::{esql-specs}/bucket.csv-spec[tag=docsBucketWeeklyHistogramWithSpan]
----
[%header.monospaced.styled,format=dsv,separator=|]
|===
include::{esql-specs}/bucket.csv-spec[tag=docsBucketWeeklyHistogramWithSpan-result]
|===

> With `DATE_TRUNC`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With `DATE_TRUNC`:
```

[source.merge.styled,esql]
----
include::{esql-specs}/date.csv-spec[tag=docsDateTrunc]
----
[%header.monospaced.styled,format=dsv,separator=|]
|===
include::{esql-specs}/date.csv-spec[tag=docsDateTrunc-result]
|===

> With `+` and/or `-`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With `+` and/or `-`:
```

[source.merge.styled,esql]
----
include::{esql-specs}/date.csv-spec[tag=docsNowWhere]
----
[%header.monospaced.styled,format=dsv,separator=|]
|===
include::{esql-specs}/date.csv-spec[tag=docsNowWhere-result]
|===

> When a time span is provided as a name parameter in string format, `TO_DATEPERIOD`, `::DATE_PERIOD`, `TO_TIMEDURATION` or `::TIME_DURATION` can be used to convert it to its corresponding time span value in arithmetic operations like `+` and/or `-`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a time span is provided as a named parameter in string format, `TO_DATEPERIOD`, `::DATE_PERIOD`, `TO_TIMEDURATION` or `::TIME_DURATION` can be used to convert it to its corresponding time span value in arithmetic operations like `+` and/or `-`.
```

> When a time span is provided as a named parameter in string format, `TO_DATEPERIOD`, `::DATE_PERIOD`, `TO_TIMEDURATION` or `::TIME_DURATION` can be used to convert it to its corresponding time span value in arithmetic operations like `+` and/or `-`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a time span is provided as a named parameter in string format, `TO_DATEPERIOD`, `::DATE_PERIOD`, `TO_TIMEDURATION` or `::TIME_DURATION` can be used to convert to its corresponding time span value for arithmetic operations like `+` and/or `-`.

```

[source, esql]
----
POST /_query
{
   "query": """
   FROM employees
   | EVAL x = hire_date + ?timespan::DATE_PERIOD, y = hire_date - TO_DATEPERIOD(?timespan)
   """,
   "params": [{"timespan" : "1 day"}]
}
----

> When a time span is provided as a name parameter in string format, it can be converted automatically to its corresponding time span value in grouping functions and scalar functions, like `BUCKET` and `DATE_TRUNC`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a time span is provided as a named parameter in string format, it can be converted automatically to its corresponding time span value in grouping functions and scalar functions, like `BUCKET` and `DATE_TRUNC`.
```

> When a time span is provided as a named parameter in string format, it can be converted automatically to its corresponding time span value in grouping functions and scalar functions, like `BUCKET` and `DATE_TRUNC`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a time span is provided as a named parameter in string format, it can be automatically converted to its corresponding time span value in grouping functions and scalar functions, like `BUCKET` and `DATE_TRUNC`.
```

The time span contains two elements, an integer value and a temporal unit, both of them are required when specifying a time span.

Time spans are often used in datetime related grouping functions like <<esql-bucket, BUCKET>>, scalar functions like <<esql-date_trunc, DATE_TRUNC>> and arithmetic operators like `+` and `-`. There are conversions functions that can convert string literals to time spans, <<esql-to_dateperiod, TO_DATEPERIOD>>, <<esql-to_timeduration, TO_TIMEDURATION>> and their corresponding cast operators `::DATE_PERIOD` and `::TIME_DURATION`.

[float]
=== Examples of using time spans in {esql}

With `BUCKET`
[source, esql]
----
FROM employees
| STATS hires_per_week = COUNT(*) BY week = BUCKET(hire_date, 1 week)
| SORT week
----

With `DATE_TRUNC`
[source, esql]
----
FROM employees
| EVAL x = date_trunc(240 hours, hire_date)
----

With `+` and/or `-`
[source, esql]
----
FROM employees
| EVAL x = hire_date + 1 month - 1 day

> ----

Reviewer: Nit: it would be great if we could extract these from existing suites (dedicated or `docs.csv-spec`), or add these as new, to ensure they'll work across possible changes.

Author: Thanks for reminding! I'll change the examples to existing tests to make sure they work.
